# Spell Books

Arcane spell casters record the spells that they know in a spell book.

**Number of spells:** A character’s spell book contains exactly the number of spells the character can memorize (as determined by the character’s class and level).

## Beginning Spells

Arcane spell casters begin with as many spells in their spell book as they can memorize. The referee may choose these spells or may allow the player to select them.

## Adding Spells

When the number of spells an arcane spellcaster can memorize increases (e.g., by gaining an experience level), they can increase the selection of spells in their spell book. In this way, the number of spells in the spell book may be brought in line with the number of spells the character can memorize. This is possible in two ways:

- **Mentoring:** The character may consult an arcane guild or mentor to learn new spells. This process takes about a week of game time. The spells a character learns in this way are determined by the referee, who may decide to let the player choose.
- **Research:** It is also possible to add spells to a spell book using ***Magical Research***.

## Lost Spell Books

An arcane spellcaster can rewrite the spells in a lost or destroyed spell book:

- **Cost:** The cost per spell to be recovered is one week of game time and 1,000gp per spell level. For instance, rewriting two 1st-level and one 2nd-level spells will take four weeks and 4,000 gp.
- **Sole activity:** This activity requires complete concentration. The character may not engage in any other activity for the required period.

## Captured Spell Books

Each arcane spell caster’s spell books are written so that only the owner can read the spells without magic.