# Combat

## Combat Sequence Per Round

1. **Declare:** Spells and melee movement.
2. **Initiative:** Each side rolls 1d6.
3. **Winning side acts:**
   1. Monster morale
   2. Movement
   3. Missile attacks
   4. Spell casting
   5. Melee attacks
4. **Other sides act:** In initiative order.

## Declare Spells and Melee Movement

Players must inform the referee if they intend to ***cast a spell*** or ***move when in melee***. Other actions need not be declared.

## Initiative

**Roll 1d6:** For each side at the start of each round.

**Winner:** The side with the highest roll acts first. Other sides act in order from highest to lowest roll.

**Ties:** Both sides may roll again, or actions on both sides may be resolved simultaneously; this means both sides may inflict deadly blows on each other!

### Slow Weapons

Combatants attacking with two-handed melee weapons (and some missile weapons—as indicated in the equipment description) always act last in the round, as if they had lost initiative.

### Individual Initiative (Optional Rule)

Instead of an initiative roll per side, a roll may be made for each individual involved in a battle, modified by DEX (see ***Dexterity*** under ***Ability Scores***). The referee may determine an initiative modifier for very fast or slow monsters instead of applying a DEX modifier.

## Monster Morale (Optional Rule)

See ***Morale (Optional Rule)***.

## Movement

### Outside of Melee

**Movement rate:** Combatants can move up to their encounter movement rate each round.

**Maximum duration:** Combatants may move at this rate for at most 60 rounds.

### In Melee

When in melee with a foe, only the following forms of movement are possible:

- **Fighting withdrawal:** The combatant moves backward at up to half their encounter movement rate. There must be clear space behind the combatant.
- **Retreat:** The combatant turns and flees from melee, moving up to their full encounter movement rate. This round: the retreating combatant may not attack; the opponent gains a +2 bonus to all attacks against the retreating combatant and ignores any AC bonus due to the combatant’s shield (if applicable).

## Missile Attacks

Possible when opponents are more than 5’ from one another (see ***Attacking***).

### Range Modifiers

All missile weapons have ranges noted in the equipment lists.

**Short range:** +1 bonus to attack rolls.

**Medium range:** No bonuses or penalties.

**Long range:** -1 penalty to attack rolls.

**Beyond long range:** Attack not possible.

### Targets Behind Cover

**Complete cover:** The target cannot be hit.

**Partial cover:** The referee may apply attack penalties of -1 thru -4 (e.g., a small table might incur a -1 penalty; dense woods might incur a -4 penalty).

## Spell Casting

**Freedom:** The spell caster must be able to speak and move their hands. A spellcaster cannot cast spells if gagged, bound, or in an area of magical silence.

**Sole action:** No other actions may be taken in the round when casting a spell.

**No movement:** The spell caster cannot move and cast a spell in the same round.

**Line of sight:** Unless noted in a spell’s description, the intended target (a specific monster, character, object, or area of effect) must be visible to the caster.

### Disrupting Spells

If a spell caster loses initiative and is successfully attacked or fails a saving throw before their turn, the spell being cast is disrupted and fails. It is removed from the caster’s memory as if it had been cast.

## Melee Attacks

Possible when opponents are 5’ or less from each other (see ***Attacking***).

## Other Sides Act

Repeat steps 3.1 to 3.5 for each side, in order of initiative (highest first).

## Attacking

### Attack Rolls

1. **Roll 1d20**
2. **Apply modifiers:** STR for melee; DEX, range, cover for missile attacks.
3. **Determine hit AC:** Look up the result in the attack matrix row for the attacker’s THAC0 (see ***Combat Tables***). This column is the AC score that the attack hits.
4. **Result:** If the hit AC is equal to or lower than the opponent’s AC, the attack hits. Referee rolls for damage.

### Ascending Armor Class (Optional Rule)

Groups using the optional rule for Ascending AC (see ***Game Statistics***) should use the following attack procedure instead.

1. **Roll 1d20**
2. **Apply modifiers:** STR for melee; DEX, range, cover for missile attacks.
3. **Determine hit AC:** Add the attackers’s attack bonus to the attack roll. The result is the ascending AC score that the attack hits.
4. **Result:** If the hit AAC is equal to or higher than the opponent’s AAC, the attack hits. Referee rolls for damage.

### 1s and 20s

Natural 20 attack rolls always hit. Natural 1 attack rolls always miss.

### Invulnerabilities

Some monsters are immune to certain attacks. In this case, damage is not rolled even if an attack hits.

### Attacks Per Round

PCs normally attack once per round. Some monsters have multiple attacks.

### Attacking and Moving

Movement and attacking may be combined in the same round.

### Rolling for Damage

**PC attacks:** Inflict 1d6 damage. STR modifies the damage of melee attacks.

**Monster attacks:** Deal damage as indicated in the monster’s description.

**Minimum damage:** An attack that hits always deals at least one point of damage, even when damage modifiers reduce the number rolled to 0 or less.

**Death:** A character or monster reduced to 0 hit points or less is killed.

### Variable Weapon Damage (Optional Rule)

Some groups may prefer different weapons to inflict different amounts of damage. In this case, PC attacks inflict the damage indicated for the weapon in the equipment lists.