# Time, Weight, Movement

## Tracking Time

When an adventure is underway, the referee should keep track of the time that elapses in the imagined world, known as ***game time***. This is distinct from ***real time***: what may take the players and referee mere seconds to describe may take PCs hours or even days to complete.

For example, when characters explore a dungeon, the referee tracks the number of turns that have elapsed; when characters are exploring the wilderness, the number of days elapsed is tracked.

The referee must adjudicate what may be accomplished in a given period.

### Resources

As game time passes, the referee should pay attention to the resources that the party consumes. For example, food, water, fuel for light sources, durations of spells or magical effects, etc.

## Tracking Movement

As player characters explore the imagined world, the referee should keep track of their location on a prepared map. The map is usually kept secret from the players, who must rely on the referee’s descriptions of the areas they explore.

The referee should refer to the characters' movement rates to determine how long it takes for characters to move from one area to the next (see ***Game Statistics***).

### Group Movement Rate

An adventuring party will usually want to stay together. The speed of the slowest member determines the movement rate of the party as a whole.

## Measurements

### Time: Rounds and Turns

Aside from everyday time increments (minutes, hours, days, and so on), the following special units are used in the game. 

**Turns:** 10 minutes of game time. There are six turns in an hour. Time is measured in turns when exploring dungeons (see ***Dungeon Adventuring***).

**Rounds:** 10 seconds of game time. There are 60 rounds in a turn. Time is measured in rounds during encounters, especially in combat (see ***Encounters*** and ***Combat***).

### Distance: Inches, Feet, Yards, Miles

This game uses imperial or customary US units to stay true to its origins. Distances are measured in inches (notated with a ”), feet (notated with a ’), yards, and miles.

### Distance Conversions

- 1 foot = 12 inches
- 1 yard = 3 feet
- 1 mile = 1,760 yards = 5,280 feet

### Weight: Coins

Weight measures typically come into play only when discussing how much characters can carry (see ***Encumbrance*** below). As coins are the most common treasure adventurers find, all weights are measured in coins. (Ten coins are equivalent to one pound.)

## Encumbrance (Optional Rule)

Some groups may wish to use a system to track the amount of gear and treasure a character can carry and how this affects their movement rate.

### Tracking Encumbrance

Encumbrance measures both the weight and bulk a character is carrying.

**Treasure:** The encumbrance of treasure carried by a character should be tracked. The encumbrance of common items of treasure is shown in the table below. The referee should decide the weight of other forms of treasure.

**Equipment:** Two options for tracking the encumbrance of characters’ equipment are presented below. The same system should be applied to all characters.

**Maximum load:** Any character can carry 1,600 coins of weight. Characters carrying more than this cannot move.

| Treasure            | Weight in Coins |
| :------------------ | :-------------: |
| Coin (any type)     |        1        |
| Gem                 |        1        |
| Jewellery (1 piece) |       10        |
| Potion              |       10        |
| Rod                 |       20        |
| Scroll              |        1        |
| Staff               |       40        |
| Wand                |       10        |

### Option 1: Basic Encumbrance

**Treasure:** The treasure's weight is tracked to ensure that the character’s maximum load is not exceeded.

**Equipment:** The weight of armor, weapons, and adventuring gear is not tracked and does not count toward a character’s maximum load.

**Movement rate:** This is determined by the type of armor the character is wearing and whether they carry a significant amount of treasure (as judged by the referee). The actual weight of the treasure carried does not affect the movement rate.

|              |  Movement Rate   |                   |
| :----------- | :--------------: | :---------------: |
| Armor Worn  | Without Treasure | Carrying Treasure |
| Unarmored   |    120’ (40’)    |     90’ (30’)     |
| Light armor |    90’ (30’)     |     60’ (20’)     |
| Heavy armor |    60’ (20’)     |     30’ (10’)     |

### Option 2: Detailed Encumbrance

**Treasure:** The weight of coins and other treasure carried is tracked.

**Equipment:** The weight of the character’s armor and weapons is also tracked (the weight of these items is listed in the equipment list. Miscellaneous adventuring gear (backpack, spikes, sacks, etc.) may be counted as 80 coins of weight.

**Movement rate:** The character’s movement rate is based on the weight of all significant items carried, including treasure, weapons, and armor.

| Encumbrance       | Movement Rate |
| :---------------- | :-----------: |
| Up to 400 coins   |  120’ (40’)   |
| Up to 600 coins   |   90’ (30’)   |
| Up to 800 coins   |   60’ (20’)   |
| Up to 1,600 coins |   30’ (10’)   |