# Saving Throws

All characters and monsters can make saving throws to avoid the full effects of certain magical or special attacks.

## Categories

There are five saving throw categories used in the following situations:

- **Death or Poison (D):** When targeted by a death ray or poison exposure.
- **Wands (W):** When targeted by an effect from a magical wand.
- **Paralysis or Petrification (P):** When targeted by an effect that paralyzes or turns to stone.
- **Breath Attacks (B):** When targeted by a dragon's breath (or other monsters with a breath attack).
- **Spells, Rods, or Staves (S):** When targeted by a baneful spell or an effect from a magical rod or staff.

## When to Roll a Saving Throw

The appropriate saving throw and the effects of success or failure are indicated in the description of the spell, monster attack, or adventure scenario.

## Saving Throw Tables

**Characters:** Each character class has its table denoting the saving throw values of characters of each experience level.

**Monsters:** Most monsters use the saving throw table under ***Combat Tables***. Some monsters’ descriptions may note that they use the table for a specific character class.

## Rolling a Saving Throw

When affected by a spell or attack form that requires a saving throw, the player or referee must roll 1d20 and compare the result to the appropriate saving throw value:

- **Greater or equal:** A result greater than or equal to the saving throw value is a success.
- **Lower:** A result of less than the saving throw value is a failure.

## Successful Saves

**Damaging effects:** A successful save against an effect that causes damage means that the damage is halved.

**Other effects:** A successful saving throw against an effect that does not cause damage means the effect has been entirely avoided or negated.

## Saving Throws Versus Poison

**Failure:** A failed save against poison is usually fatal.

**Damage:** If a poisonous attack also inflicts damage, the damage is not affected by the success or failure of the saving throw.