# Waterborne Adventuring

## Sequence of Play Per Day

1. **Decide course:** The players decide on their course of travel for the day.
2. **Losing direction:** The referee determines whether the party gets lost.
3. **Weather:** The referee determines the ***Wind Conditions***.
4. **Wandering monsters:** The referee makes checks as applicable.
5. **Description:** The referee describes the regions passed through and any sites of interest the party has, asking players for their actions, as required. If monsters are encountered, follow the procedure described in ***Encounters***.
6. **End of day:** The referee updates time records, with special attention to rations, spell durations, and the crew’s need to rest.

## Distance and Measurement

**Ranges and movement rates:** These are measured in yards instead of feet. This means that ranges and movement rates are tripled.

**Areas:** Spell effects, breath weapons, etc., are still measured in feet.

## Losing Direction

**With a navigator aboard:** The chance of getting lost is 2-in-6.

**Without a navigator aboard:** The chance of getting lost is 100% on the open seas and 2-in-6 within sight of land.

**Effects:** See ***Losing Direction***.

## Surprise

Aquatic monsters are usually not surprised by ships. Special circumstances (e.g., thick fog) may alter this.

## Travel on the Water

**Miles per day:** The number of miles a creature or vessel can travel daily is determined by ***dividing its base movement rate by five***. For example, a vessel with a base movement rate of 360’ could travel up to 72 miles in a day.

### Modifiers

The distance traveled in a day may be affected by the prevailing water and weather conditions:

- **River travel:** Water currents may increase (when moving downstream) or decrease (when moving upstream) the distance traveled by 1d6+6 miles per day.
- **Sailing:** The movement rate of sailing vessels is affected by the prevailing wind conditions (see ***Wind Conditions***).

## Visibility

**Land:** On a clear day, land can be spotted at a distance of 24 miles. This may be reduced based on light and weather conditions.

**Ships:** May be sighted and identified at 300 yards on a clear day or as little as 40 yards in dense fog.

## Wandering Monsters

**Frequency:** A check is typically rolled once daily, but the referee may choose to make more checks, up to 3 or 4 a day.

**Chance:** The chance of encountering a wandering monster is 2-in-6 in oceans or rivers and 3-in-6 in swamps.

**Distance:** Wandering monsters are encountered 4d6 × 10 yards away. If either side is surprised (see ***Encounters***), this is reduced to 1d4 × 10 yards.

**Location:** Aquatic encounters may occur on the open water or land, if the party docks at some point during the day.

## Wind Conditions

Wind conditions at sea affect the rate at which a sailing vessel can travel. Extreme winds can also make travel hazardous. The referee should check the wind conditions at the start of each day, rolling 2d6:

- **2:** No wind; sailing is not possible.
- **3–11:** Normal sailing is possible.
- **12:** Gale or storm; sailing vessels’ speed tripled (see ***Gales and Storms***).

### Variable Wind Conditions (Optional Rule)

Groups who prefer a slightly more detailed system of sea travel may use the table below, which adds extra detail to the daily 2d6 wind conditions roll.

| 2d6  | Wind            | Effect                                                       |
| :--: | :-------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------- |
|  2   | No wind         | Sailing is impossible—movement by oar at ⅓ rate (due to fatigue). |
|  3   | Faint breeze    | Sailing movement rate reduced to ⅓ normal.                   |
|  4   | Gentle breeze   | Sailing movement rate reduced to ½ normal.                   |
|  5   | Moderate breeze | Sailing movement rate reduced to ⅔ normal.                   |
| 6–8  | Fresh breeze    | Normal sailing movement rate.                                |
|  9   | Strong breeze   | Sailing movement rate increased by ⅓.                        |
|  10  | High wind       | Sailing movement rate increased by ½.                        |
|  11  | Near gale       | Sailing movement rate doubled. See ***#Near Gales***.        |
|  12  | Gale or storm   | Sailing movement rate tripled. See ***#Gales and Storms***.  |

### Near Gales

**Seaworthy vessels:** Have a 10% chance of taking on water.

**Unseaworthy vessels:** Have a 20% chance of taking on water.

**Effect of taking on water:** The ship’s movement is reduced by one-third until repaired at a dock.

### Gales and Storms

**Seaworthy vessels:** Sailing vessels can attempt to move with the wind to avoid damage. This is handled as follows:

- The vessel travels at three times its normal speed in a randomly determined direction. (The referee may roll 1d6, with 1 indicating the intended direction of travel, 2 indicating 60° to the right, 3 indicating 120° to the right, and so on.)
- If the ship encounters land during this travel, there is a 75% chance of it wrecking against the shore.

**Unseaworthy vessels:**

- There is an 80% chance of the vessel being overrun with water and sinking.
- If the vessel is in sight of land when the gale hits, it may attempt to beach. If the shore is relatively clear of physical dangers (rocks, cliffs, etc.), this is automatically successful; otherwise, there is a 2-in-6 chance of finding a safe harbor to weather the storm.