# Encounters 

An encounter begins when characters meet a monster due to a planned encounter in the explored area or because a wandering monster check (see ***Wandering Monsters***) indicates an encounter.

## Encounter Sequence

1. **Surprise:** The referee rolls for surprise, if applicable.
2. **Encounter Distance:** The referee determines how far away the monsters are from the PCs.
3. **Initiative:** Any sides that are not surprised roll initiative to determine who acts first.
4. **Actions:** Any sides that are not surprised decide how they will respond to the encounter. The encounter is played out accordingly.
5. **Conclusion:** One turn has passed.

## Surprise

### When to Check

A check for surprise is made for any side that is not expecting the encounter. For example, if a monster spotted an approaching party’s torch light and waited quietly, the monster would not need to roll surprise, but the party would.

### Light and Surprise

Characters or monsters that carry a light in a dark environment usually cannot surprise opponents because the light gives their presence away.

### Surprise Checks

Each side that is unaware of the other’s presence rolls 1d6.

**Monsters:** The referee rolls for monsters.

**PCs:** One player rolls for the adventuring party as a whole.

**Results:** A result of 1 or 2 means the side is surprised.

### Effects of Surprise

**Both sides surprised:** There is simply a momentary confusion—neither side has any advantage.

**One side surprised:** The side that is not surprised gains a one-round advantage. The surprised side cannot act that round.

## Encounter Distance

The situation in which the encounter occurs often determines how far away the monster is. If there is uncertainty, the encounter distance may be determined randomly:

- **Dungeon:** 2d6 × 10 feet.
- **Wilderness:** 4d6 × 10 yards (or 1d4 × 10 yards if either side is surprised).
- **Waterborne:** 4d6 × 10 yards (or 1d4 × 10 yards if either side is surprised).

## Initiative

(See ***Combat*** for complete details.)

**Roll 1d6:** For each side, at the start of each round.

**Winner:** The side with the highest roll acts first, followed by other sides in order from highest to lowest initiative.

**Ties:** Both sides may roll again, or actions on both sides may be resolved simultaneously.

## Actions

### Player Character Actions

The players decide how they will act.

### Monster Actions

The referee determines the monsters’ reaction to the party. Sometimes, circumstances make it obvious how a monster will react. Otherwise, the referee may roll on the table below to determine how a monster reacts to the party.

**Charisma:** If one specific character attempts to speak with the monsters, that character’s NPC reactions modifier due to CHA (see ***Ability Scores***) is used to modify the monster reaction roll.

|    2d6     | Result                     |
| :--------: | :------------------------- |
| 2 or less  | Attacks                    |
|    3–5     | Hostile, may attack        |
|    6–8     | Uncertain, confused        |
|    9–11    | Indifferent, may negotiate |
| 12 or more | Eager, friendly            |

### Common Actions

Any action is possible in an encounter, but the following are common:

- **Combat:** If one side attacks, casts spells, or makes tactical movements, begin tracking time in rounds, following the combat procedure (see ***Combat***).
- **Evasion:** If one side decides to flee, the other may choose to pursue (see ***Evasion***).
- **Parley:** PCs may attempt to communicate with monsters. Opening an encounter in this way can influence the monsters’ behavior (see ***Monster Actions***). If both sides decide to talk, the negotiation may be role-played.

## Movement

**Encounter movement rate:** During encounters, a character can move up to one-third of their base movement rate per round in feet (in the dungeon) or yards (in the wilderness). For example, a character whose base movement rate is 120’ could move 40’ per round during a dungeon encounter.

**Maximum duration:** Characters may move at this rate for at most 60 rounds (one turn).

## Evasion

If one side wishes to avoid an encounter, it may attempt to flee. This is called ***evasion*** and is only possible ***before combat has begun***. When a side decides to try an evasion, the opposing side must decide whether or not to pursue it. Players May decide freely whether they wish to pursue fleeing monsters.

**Monsters:** The referee must decide whether monsters pursue fleeing PCs. (A low roll on the Monster Reactions table may be taken to indicate that the monster will pursue.)

**No pursuit:** If the opposing side decides to let the other side flee, the evasion automatically succeeds; the encounter is avoided.

**Pursuit:** If the opposing side gives chase, the chance of the evasion succeeding depends on the explored environment. See ***Evasion and Pursuit***.

## Conclusion

An encounter is assumed to take at least one full turn to complete, including time to rest, regroup, clean weapons, bind wounds, and so on afterward.