# Monsters and NPCs

The referee is responsible for deciding how monsters and NPCs react when encountered and what schemes and tactics they follow when the PCs are elsewhere.

## Intelligence and Tactics

When deciding how a monster or NPC acts, the referee should bear its level of intelligence in mind. Intelligent monsters might use any of the following tactics.

**Traps and stealth:** Monsters who are cunning but not physically powerful might lay traps or ambushes and may favor attacking PCs from a distance with missile weapons.

**Guards:** Monsters may use guards or pets to weaken PCs or protect important escape routes.

**Magic items:** Monsters will use any magic items in their lair to thwart the PCs.

**Learning and preparation:** If PCs encounter but do not defeat monsters, the monsters will learn from the experience and prepare for a repeat attack. They may build defensive structures, call for reinforcements, relocate their base of operations, and so on.

**Adaptation:** Monsters may copy or adapt tactics successfully used by PCs and plan specific counter-moves.

## Teamwork

When designing encounters, the referee should remember that—like player characters—monsters and NPCs will join forces to increase their chance of survival.

**Combined forces:** Monsters skilled in melee, missile attacks, and magic may join forces.

**Leaders:** May have special abilities, maximum hit points, or additional Hit Dice.

## Motivation

The same as player characters, intelligent monsters and NPCs have their interests and motivations.

**Role-playing:** The referee should consider the monster’s reaction to negotiations with PCs, considering its alignment and personality. Monsters should not always cooperate with PCs’ wishes!

**Allies:** Monsters and NPCs may be encountered with friends, minions, or retainers. These will come to the aid of the monster or may avenge it if it is defeated.