# Adventure Scenarios

The first step in designing an adventure of any kind is to decide on the type of scenario. This hook draws the player characters to the adventure site and provides a background theme for the referee to tie the location together. The scenario drives the referee’s choices of specific traps, treasures, and monsters to be placed in the area. The following examples may be used for inspiration.

## 1. Banishing Ancient Evil

An evil presence (e.g., a monster or NPC) must be banished or destroyed. It may have been dormant for many years and only recently awakened (perhaps due to another party’s meddling).

## 2. Clearing Ruins

Settlers plan to move into an abandoned settlement or stronghold. Before they arrive, the PCs must scout the area and clear out any monsters or other dangers. The ruins need not be remote—they could even be within (or beneath) a significant settlement.

## 3. Contacting a Lost Civilisation

The PCs discover a long-lost race in a fantastic location. They may have once been human but now adapt to their strange environment. For example, they may have reverted to bestial behavior or may be adapted to subterranean life, with pale skin and infravision.

## 4. Escaping from Captivity

An enemy has taken the PCs prisoner, and they begin the adventure in captivity, possibly with a horrible fate awaiting them shortly. They must regain their freedom.

## 5. Exploring Unknown Territory

An NPC hires the party to explore and map an unknown region. This may be a previously uncharted area or a recent alteration to a familiar territory (e.g., a magic castle may appear in an empty plain).

## 6. Performing a Quest

A deity or powerful NPC (e.g., a king) sends the PCs on a quest. This may involve recovering holy or magical items.

## 7. Rescuing Captives

Bandits, wicked monsters, or an evil wizard have kidnapped important NPCs. The PCs attempt to rescue the prisoners, either seeking a reward or because of a personal connection with the unfortunate captives. The PCs may also be hired as bodyguards to NPCs negotiating with the kidnappers.

## 8. Scouting an Enemy Outpost

An invasion is looming (or in progress)! The PCs are tasked with infiltrating an enemy outpost, gathering intelligence on their plans, strengths, and weaknesses, and (if possible) destroying them.

## 9. Seeking a Magical Doorway

A gateway allows magical travel (either one-way or bidirectional) between distant locations or other worlds. The PCs may be tasked with locating a lost portal or closing a portal used by enemies. The portal may also be the only means of travel to a fantastic destination the PCs must visit.

## 10. Visiting a Sacred Site

To consult with an oracle, remove a curse, or find a holy relic, the PCs must journey to a sacred site (e.g., a shrine or temple). The exact location of the site is usually a matter of conjecture.