# Halfling

| Demihuman Class |                                            |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| Requirements    | Minimum CON 9, minimum DEX 9               |
| Prime requisite | DEX and STR                                |
| Hit Dice        | 1d6                                        |
| Maximum level   | 8                                          |
| Armor          | Any appropriate size, including shields |
| Weapons         | Any appropriate to size                    |
| Languages       | Alignment, Common, Halfling                |


Halflings are small, rotund demihumans with curly hair on their heads and feet. They weigh about 60 pounds and are around 3’ tall. Halflings are friendly and welcoming folk. Above all, they love the comforts of home and are not known for their bravery. Halflings who gain treasure through adventuring will often use their wealth in pursuit of a quiet, comfortable life.

**Prime requisites:** A halfling with at least 13 in one prime requisite gains a 5% bonus to experience. If both DEX and STR are 13 or higher, the halfling gets a +10% bonus.

## Combat

Halflings can use all types of armor, but it must be tailored to their small size. Similarly, they can use any weapon appropriate to their stature (as determined by the referee. They cannot use longbows or two-handed swords.

## Defensive Bonus

Due to their small size, halflings gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class when attacked by large opponents (greater than human-sized).

## Hiding

Halflings have the ability to avoid detection, apparently vanishing from sight:

- In woods or undergrowth, a halfling can hide with a 90% chance of success.

- In dungeons, a halfling can hide in normal lighting conditions with a 2-in-6 chance of success. There must be some form of cover (e.g. shadows) and the halfling must remain motionless and silent.

## Initiative Bonus (Optional Rule)

If using the optional rule for individual initiative (see ***Combat***), halflings get a bonus of +1 to initiative rolls.

## Listening at Doors

Halflings have a 2-in-6 chance of hearing noises (see ***Dungeon Adventuring***).

## Missile Attack Bonus

Halflings’ keen coordination grants them a +1 bonus to attack rolls with all missile weapons.

## Stronghold

Any time a halfling wishes (and has sufficient money), they may build a stronghold, which will form the basis of a new community of halflings. Halfling communities—known as Shires—are typically located in the gentle countryside of little rivers and rolling hills. The leader of the community is called the Sheriff.

## Halfling Level Progression

|       | Saving Throws |      |         |      |      |      |      |      |
| :---: | :-----------: | :--: | :-----: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| Level |      XP       |  HD  |  THAC0  |  D   |  W   |  P   |  B   |  S   |
|   1   |       0       | 1d6  | 19 [0]  |  8   |  9   |  10  |  13  |  12  |
|   2   |     2,000     | 2d6  | 19 [0]  |  8   |  9   |  10  |  13  |  12  |
|   3   |     4,000     | 3d6  | 19 [0]  |  8   |  9   |  10  |  13  |  12  |
|   4   |     8,000     | 4d6  | 17 [+2] |  6   |  7   |  8   |  10  |  10  |
|   5   |    16,000     | 5d6  | 17 [+2] |  6   |  7   |  8   |  10  |  10  |
|   6   |    32,000     | 6d6  | 17 [+2] |  6   |  7   |  8   |  10  |  10  |
|   7   |    64,000     | 7d6  | 14 [+5] |  4   |  5   |  6   |  7   |  8   |
|   8   |    120,000    | 8d6  | 14 [+5] |  4   |  5   |  6   |  7   |  8   |

**D:** Death / poison; **W:** Wands; **P:** Paralysis / petrify; **B:** Breath attacks; **S:** Spells / rods / staves.