# Creating a Character

To create a character, you’ll first need a character sheet—a sheet of paper on which to record all information about the new character.

A selection of different character sheet PDFs is available at necroticgnome.com. These may be downloaded and printed for use in your games.

## 1. Roll Ability Scores

Roll 3d6 in order of your character’s ability scores: Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma (see ***Ability Scores***).

### Sub-Par Characters

If you roll a character with abysmal ability scores—for example, an 8 or less in every score or a meager rating in more than one ability—the referee may allow you to discard the character and start again.

## 2. Choose a Class

Select one of the classes available (see ***Character Classes***), bearing in mind some classes' minimum ability score requirements. The chosen class determines your character’s race—unless a demihuman class is selected, the character is human.

## 3. Adjust Ability Scores

If you wish, you may raise your character’s prime requisite of your character by lowering other (non-prime requisite) ability scores. One point may be added to a prime requisite for every two points by which an ability score is reduced. The following restrictions apply:

- Only Strength, Intelligence, and Wisdom may be lowered in this way.
- No score may be lowered below 9.
- Some character classes may have additional constraints.

## 4. Note Ability Score Modifiers

Now that your character’s ability scores are fixed, note any associated bonuses or penalties (see ***Ability Scores***).

## 5. Note Attack Values

The level progression chart for your character’s class lists your THAC0 score. This indicates your chance of hitting opponents in combat, as determined by the ***Attack Matrix***.

For quick reference, it is convenient to look up the values in the attack matrix row corresponding to the character’s THAC0 (determined by class and level) and record them on your character sheet. 1st level characters have a THAC0 of 19 [0], resulting in the attack values below.

### Ascending AC (Optional Rule)

If using the optional rule for ***Ascending AC***, record your attack bonus on your character sheet, instead of the attack matrix quick reference.

| Attack Roll | 10   | 11   | 12   | 13   | 14   | 15   | 16   | 17   | 18   | 19   |
| ----------: | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
|      AC Hit | 9    | 8    | 7    | 6    | 5    | 4    | 3    | 2    | 1    | 0    |

## 6. Note Saving Throws and Class Abilities

Record any special abilities possessed by your character as a result of their class, as well as your character’s saving throws. If your character has a spell book, ask your referee which spells are recorded. The referee may allow you to choose.

## 7. Roll Hit Points

Determine your character’s hit points by rolling the die type appropriate to the chosen class. Modifiers for high or low Constitution apply (see ***Ability Scores***). Your character always starts with at least 1 hit point, regardless of the CON modifier.

### Re-Rolling 1s and 2s (Optional Rule)

If your roll for hit points comes up 1 or 2 (before applying any CON modifier), the referee may allow you to re-roll. This is to increase the survivability of 1st-level PCs.

## 8. Choose Alignment

Decide whether your character is Lawful, Neutral, or Chaotic (see ***Alignment***), and note this on your character sheet.

## 9. Note Known Languages

Your character’s native languages are listed in the class description. This includes the common tongue and the character’s alignment language—see ***Languages***. Characters with high INT may also choose additional languages from the list available in the setting.

## 10. Buy Equipment

Your character starts play with 3d6 × 10 gold pieces (see ***Wealth***). You may spend as much of this money as you wish to equip your character for adventure, consulting the equipment lists under ***Equipment & Services***.

**Remember:** Your chosen class may restrict your use of some equipment (e.g., weapons and armor).

## 11. Note Armor Class

Two factors determine your character’s Armor Class:

- **Armor:** The armor worn determines your character’s base AC. See the equipment lists under ***Armor***.
- **Dexterity:** A nimble character is more difficult to attack (see ***Dexterity*** under ***Ability Scores***).

### Unarmored AC

If your character has no armor, their base AC is 9 [10].

## 12. Note Level and XP

Your character begins play at 1st level with 0 XP.

## 13. Name Character

Finally, choose a name for your character. You are now ready for adventure!