# Extraordinary Powers of Sentient Swords

Each power should be rolled on the table below. Duplicates should be re-rolled, unless noted.

**Usage frequency:** Unless a power’s description notes otherwise, it may be used at most three times a day.

| d100  | Power                            |
| :---: | :------------------------------- |
| 01–10 | Clairaudience                    |
| 11–20 | Clairvoyance                     |
| 21–30 | ESP                              |
| 31–35 | Extra damage (dups. allowed)     |
| 36–40 | Flying                           |
| 41–45 | Healing (duplicates allowed)     |
| 46–54 | Illusion                         |
| 55–59 | Levitation                       |
| 60–69 | Telekinesis                      |
| 70–79 | Telepathy                        |
| 80–88 | Teleportation                    |
| 89–97 | X-ray vision                     |
| 98–99 | Roll twice again on this table   |
|  00   | Roll 3 times again on this table |

## Clairaudience

It enables the wielder to hear through the ears of another creature.

- **Activation:** The wielder must concentrate for one turn to activate this power.
- **Range:** The other creature must be within 60’.
- **Obstruction:** Lead blocks this power.

## Clairvoyance

It enables the wielder to see through the eyes of another creature.

- **Activation:** The wielder must concentrate for one turn to activate this power.
- **Range:** The other creature must be within 60’.
- **Obstruction:** Lead blocks this power.

## ESP

It enables the wielder to read the thoughts of another living creature.

- **Activation:** To activate this power, the wielder must concentrate in a specific direction.
- **Range:** The other creature must be within 60’.
- **Comprehension:** The wielder gains an empathic understanding of the creature’s thoughts.
- **Obstruction:** Lead blocks this power.

## Extra Damage

Increases the wielder’s strength for 1d10 rounds. While the power is active, the damage inflicted by the wielder is multiplied by 4.

### Duplicates

If this power is rolled more than once, the damage multiplier is increased by one for each duplicate roll.

## Flying

The wielder can fly for up to 3 turns.

- **Movement rate:** A speed of up to 360’ (120’) is possible.
- **Free movement:** This is possible in any direction, including levitating and hovering mid-air.

## Healing

The sword heals damage.

- **Effect:** One point of damage is healed per round for six rounds.
- **Usage frequency:** This power may only be activated once a day.

### Duplicates

If this power is rolled more than once, the duration of the power is increased by 6 rounds for each duplicate.

## Illusion

An illusion of the wielder’s choosing manifests. This works in the same way as the magic-user spell *phantasmal force*.

## Levitation

Grants the wielder the ability to move up and down through the air for up to 3 turns:

- **Vertical:** The wielder mentally directs vertical movement up to 20’ per round.
- **Horizontal:** The character can push against solid objects to move laterally.
- **Weight:** A normal amount of weight can be carried while levitating.

## Telekinesis

By concentrating, the wielder can move objects or creatures within 120’ by the power of thought.

- **Weight:** Up to 2,000 coins of weight may be targeted.
- **Movement:** The target may be moved up to 20’ per round in whatever direction the wielder wishes (including vertically).
- **Resisting:** A targeted creature may **save versus spells** to resist.
- **Duration:** Up to 6 rounds.
- **Concentration:** If concentration is broken, the target falls.

## Telepathy

It enables the wielder to read the thoughts of another living creature.

- **Concentration:** To activate this power, the wielder must concentrate in a specific direction.
- **Range:** The other creature must be within 60’.
- **Comprehension:** The wielder gains an empathic understanding of the creature’s thoughts.
- **Bidirectional communication:** The wielder may also initiate a bidirectional telepathic communication with the creature, though it is not compelled to respond.
- **Obstruction:** Lead blocks this power.

## Teleportation

The wielder can teleport, per the magic-user spell (see ***Teleport.

## X-Ray Vision

Allows the wielder to see through solid objects.

- **Through stone:** Sight up to 30’ through stone is possible.
- **Through softer materials:** Sight up to 60’ through less dense materials (cloth, water, wood) is possible.
- **Obstructions:** Sight through gold or lead is blocked.
- **Searching:** When used for searching (see ***Dungeon Adventuring***), the wielder is guaranteed to notice secret doors or traps in the 10’ square area being examined.
- **Concentration:** Usage requires concentration (the wielder cannot move).
- **Usage frequency:** This power may not be activated more frequently than once per turn.