# Vampire

Greatly feared undead monsters that live by drinking the blood of mortals. Dwell in ruins, tombs, and deserted locales.

------

| Armor Class     | 2 [17]                                              |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| Hit Dice         | 7 to 9** (31 / 36 / 40hp)                           |
| Attacks          | 1 × touch (1d10 + energy drain) or 1 × gaze (charm) |
| THAC0            | 13 [+6] / 12 [+7] / 12 [+7]                         |
| Movement         | 120’ (40’)                                          |
| Saving Throws    | D8 W9 P10 B10 S12 (7 to 9)                          |
| Morale           | 11                                                  |
| Alignment        | Chaotic                                             |
| XP               | 1,250 / 1,750 / 2,300                               |
| Number Appearing | 1d4 (1d6)                                           |
| Treasure Type    | F                                                   |

------

- **Undead:** Make no noise until they attack. Immune to effects that affect living creatures (e.g., poison). Immune to mind-affecting or mind-reading spells (e.g., *charm*, *hold*, *sleep*).

- **Mundane damage immunity:** Can only be harmed by magical attacks.

- **Energy drain:** A successfully touched target permanently loses two experience levels (or Hit Dice). This incurs a loss of two Hit Dice of hit points, as well as all other benefits due to the drained levels (e.g., spells, saving throws, etc.). A character’s XP is reduced to the lowest amount for the new level. A person drained of all levels becomes a vampire in 3 days.

- **Charming gaze:** **Save versus spells at -2** or be charmed: move towards the vampire (resisting those who try to prevent it); defend the vampire; obey the vampire’s commands (if understood); unable to cast spells or use magic items; unable to harm the vampire. Killing the vampire breaks the charm.

- **Regeneration:** A damaged vampire gains 3hp at the start of each round, as long as it is alive.

- **At 0hp:** Change into gaseous form; flee to the coffin.

- Change form:

   

  At will; takes 1 round:

  - **Humanoid:** Standard form.
  - **Dire wolf:** **Att** 1 × bite (2d4), **MV** 150’ (50’). AC, HD, morale, saves as vampire.
  - **Giant bat:** **Att** 1 × bite (1d4), **MV** 30’ (10’) / 180’ (60’) flying. AC, HD, morale, saves as vampire.
  - **Gaseous cloud:** **MV** 180’ (60’) flying. Immune to all weapons. Cannot attack.

- **Summon beasts:** In human form only. Creatures from the surrounding area: 1d10 × 10 rats, 5d4 giant rats, 1d10 × 10 bats, 3d6 giant bats, 3d6 wolves, or 2d4 dire wolves.

- **Coffins:** Must rest in a coffin during the day or lose 2d6hp (only regenerated by resting a full day). Cannot rest in a blessed coffin. Always keep multiple coffins in hidden locations.

- Vulnerabilities:

  - **Garlic:** Odour repels: save vs poison or unable to attack this round.
  - **Holy symbols:** If presented, will keep a vampire at bay (10’). May attack wielder from another direction.
  - **Running water:** Cannot cross (in any form), except by a bridge or carried inside a coffin.
  - **Mirrors:** Avoid; do not cast a reflection.
  - **Continual light:** Partly blinded by the light from this spell (-4 to attacks).

- Destroying:

  - **Sunlight:** Save versus death each round or be disintegrated.
  - **Stake through the heart:** Permanently kills.
  - **Immersion in water:** For 1 turn permanently kills.
  - **Destroying coffins:** Permanently killed if all hit points lost when unable to rest (see coffins).